Dr. Ehsan Kamalinejad,
who usually goes by EK,
is a machine learning
applied scientist.
He's currently elite scientists
working on NLP
developments at Amazon.
Previously, he
co-founded Visual One,
a Y Combinator start-up
in computer vision.
Before that, he was
a tech lead machine
learning engineer at Apple,
working on projects
such as memories.
EK is also an
Associate Professor of
Mathematics at California
State University, East Bay.
EK, thanks for
joining me today to
discuss the PPO reinforcement
learning algorithm.
Thanks for having me.
What does PPO stand
for and what do
those terms mean in
the context of
reinforcement learning?
PPO stands for Proximal
Policy Optimization,
which is a powerful
algorithm for
solving reinforcement
learning problems.
As the name suggests,
PPO optimizes a policy,
in this case the LLM,
to be more aligned with
human preferences.
Over many iterations, PPO
makes updates to the LLM.
The updates are small and
within a bounded region,
resulting in an updated LLM
that is close to the
previous version,
hence the name Proximal
Policy Optimization.
Keeping the changes within
this small region result
in a more stable learning.
The goal is to update
the policy so that the
reward is maximized.
Can you discuss
how this works in
the specific context of
large language models?
Yes, happy to.
You start PPO with your
initial instruct LLM,
then at a high level,
each cycle of PPO
goes over two phases.
In Phase I, the LLM,
is used to carry out a
number of experiments,
completing the given prompts.
These experiments
allow you to update
the LLM against the
reward model in Phase II.
Remember that the reward model
captures the human preferences.
For example, the reward
can define how helpful,
harmless, and honest
the responses are.
The expected reward
of a completion is
an important quantity used
in the PPO objective.
We estimate this
quantity through
a separate head of the LLM
called the value function.
Let's have a closer look at
the value function
and the value loss.
Assume a number of
prompts are given.
First, you generate the LLM
responses to the prompts,
then you calculate
the reward for
the prompt completions
using the reward model.
For example, the first
prompt completion shown
here might receive
a reward of 1.87.
The next one might receive a
reward of -1.24, and so on.
You have a set of
prompt completions
and their corresponding rewards.
The value function estimates
the expected total reward for a
given State S. In other words,
as the LLM generates each
token of a completion,
you want to estimate
the total future reward
based on the current
sequence of tokens.
You can think of this as
a baseline to evaluate
the quality of completions
against your alignment criteria.
Let's say that at this
step of completion,
the estimated future
total reward is 0.34.
With the next generated token,
the estimated future total
reward increases to 1.23.
The goal is to minimize
the value loss that is
the difference between
the actual future total
reward in this example,
1.87, and its approximation
to the value function,
in this example, 1.23.
The value loss makes
estimates for future
rewards more accurate.
The value function
is then used in
Advantage Estimation in Phase 2,
which we will discuss in a bit.
This is similar to when you
start writing a passage,
and you have a rough idea of
its final form even
before you write it.
[inaudible] you mentioned that
the losses and
rewards determined in
Phase 1 are used in Phase 2
to update the weights
resulting in an updated LLM.
Can you explain this process
in a little bit more detail?
Sure. In Phase 2,
you make a small updates
to the model and evaluate
the impact of those updates on
your alignment goal
for the model.
The model weights updates are
guided by the prompt completion,
losses, and rewards.
PPO also ensures to keep
the model updates within
a certain small region
called the trust region.
This is where the proximal
aspect of PPO comes into play.
Ideally, this series
of small updates
will move the model
towards higher rewards.
The PPO policy objective
is the main ingredient
of this method.
Remember, the
objective is to find
a policy whose expected
reward is high.
In other words, you're trying to
make updates to the
LLM weights that
result in completions
more aligned with
human preferences and so
receive a higher reward.
The policy loss is the
main objective that
the PPO algorithm tries to
optimize during training.
I know the math
looks complicated,
but it's actually
simpler than it appears.
Let's break it
down step-by-step.
First, focus on
the most important expression
and ignore the rest for now.
Pi of A_t given S_t in
this context of an LLM,
is the probability of
the next token A_t given
the current prompt S_t.
The action A_t is
the next token,
and the state S_t is the
completed prompt
up to the token t.
The denominator is
the probability of
the next token with
the initial version of
the LLM which is frozen.
The numerator is the
probabilities of the next token,
through the updated LLM,
which we can change
for the better reward.
A-hat_t is called the estimated
advantage term of a
given choice of action.
The advantage term estimates
how much better or worse
the current action
is compared to
all possible actions
at data state.
We look at the expected
future rewards
of a completion
following the new token,
and we estimate how advantageous
this completion is
compared to the rest.
There is a recursive
formula to estimate
this quantity based on
the value function that
we discussed earlier.
Here, we focus on
intuitive understanding.
Here is a visual representation
of what I just described.
You have a prompt S,
and you have different
paths to complete it,
illustrated by different
paths on the figure.
The advantage term tells
you how better or
worse the current
token A_t is with respect
to all the possible tokens.
In this visualization,
the top path which goes
higher is better completion,
receiving a higher reward.
The bottom path goes down
which is a worst completion.
So I do have a question EK,
why does maximizing this
term lead to higher rewards?
Let's consider the case where
the advantage is positive
for the suggested token.
A positive advantage
means that the
suggested token is
better than the average.
Therefore, increasing
the probability
of the current token
seems like a good strategy
that leads to higher rewards.
This translates to maximizing
the expression we have here.
If the suggested token
is worse than average,
the advantage will be negative.
Again, maximizing the expression
will demote the token,
which is the correct strategy.
So the overall conclusion
is that maximizing
this expression results
in a better aligned LLM.
Great. So let's just maximize
this expression then.
Directly maximizing
the expression would
lead into problems
because our calculations
are reliable under
the assumption
that our advantage
estimations are valid.
The advantage estimates
are valid only when
the old and new policies
are close to each other.
This is where the rest of
the terms come into play.
So stepping back and looking
at the whole equation again,
what happens here is that you
pick the smaller
of the two terms.
The one we just discussed
and this second
modified version of it.
Notice that this second
expression defines a region,
where two policies
are near each other.
These extra terms
are guardrails,
and simply define a region
in proximity to the LLM,
where our estimates
have small errors.
This is called the trust region.
These extra terms ensure that we
are unlikely to leave
the trust region.
In summary, optimizing
the PPO policy
objective results in
a better LLM without overshooting
to unreliable regions.
Are there any
additional components?
Yes. You also have
the entropy loss.
While the policy loss moves
the model towards
alignment goal,
entropy allows the model
to maintain creativity.
If you kept entropy low,
you might end up
always completing
the prompt in the same
way as shown here.
Higher entropy guides the
LLM towards more creativity.
This is similar to the
temperature setting
of LLM that you've
seen in Week 1.
The difference is
that the temperature
influences model creativity
at the inference time,
while the entropy influences
the model creativity
during training.
Putting all terms together
as a weighted sum,
we get our PPO objective,
which updates the model towards
human preference in
a stable manner.
This is the overall
PPO objective.
The C1 and C2 coefficients
are hyperparameters.
The PPO objective updates
the model weights through
back propagation
over several steps.
Once the model
weights are updated,
PPO starts a new cycle.
For the next iteration,
the LLM is replaced
with the updated LLM,
and a new PPO cycle starts.
After many iterations, you
arrive at the human-aligned LLM.
Now, are there other
reinforcement learning techniques
that are used for RLHF?
Yes. For example, Q-learning is
an alternate technique for
fine-tuning LLMs through RL,
but PPO is currently the
most popular method.
In my opinion, PPO is
popular because it has
the right balance of
complexity and performance.
That being said, fine-tuning
the LLMs through
human or AI feedback is an
active area of research.
We can expect many
more developments
in this area in the near future.
For example, just before we
were recording this video,
researchers at Stanford
published a paper
describing a technique
called direct preference
optimization,
which is a simpler
alternate to RLHF.
New methods like this are
still in active development,
and more work has to be done
to better understand
their benefits,
but I think this is a very
exciting area of research.
Agree. Thanks so
much EK for sharing
those insights into PPO and
reinforcement learning.
Thanks, Andrea.
Thanks for having me.